Hello, I am Maria Martinez and in this
presentation I am going to explain Super-
Refractory Status Epilepticus through a clinical
case resolved with therapeutic hypothermia.
Throughout the presentation
we will see a brief introduction,
we will present and evaluate the case,
we will see the treatment strategies,
the additional measures implemented,
what therapeutic hypothermia is,
the recovery and follow-up after
treatment and a general conclusion.
Status epilepticus is a seizure
that persists despite treatment.
It is a neurological emergency that
requires immediate medical attention.
To understand it, a clinical case
of a patient with
super-refractory status epilepticus is presented.
The patient is a 14-year-old boy
with no history of epilepsy.
His initial symptoms are
fever, headache, vomiting and
generalized tonic-clonic seizures.
The initial suspicion is viral encephalitis.
Tests for viral agents were performed
and came out negative.
The evolution of the case is that the
seizures persist despite the
initial treatment, developing a
super-refractory epileptic status,
persisting for more than 24 hours
despite the use of anesthetics.
The treatment strategies depend
on the level where the patient is.
In the first level, benzodiazepines such as
midazolam are taken, in the second level,
anticonvulsants such as phenytoin or
levetiracetam, in the third level,
anesthetics such as thiopental or Propofol.
In this case, conventional treatment
strategies failed to
control the seizures.
On the left is a graph of the
drugs administered in super-refractory
epileptic status, with the drugs used
versus the time of application in hours.
Given the lack of response to
conventional treatments,
additional measures were implemented
to try to control the seizures.
A high-fat, low-carbohydrate
ketogenic diet is followed,
since it has been shown that this diet
can have anticonvulsant effects.
Magnesium sulfate is taken, known for its
anticonvulsant properties, in addition to using
human gammaglobulin, to modulate the immune
system, and its potential in the treatment
of some autoimmune encephalitis has been studied.
Finally, an open tracheotomy was performed
to facilitate long-term
mechanical ventilation.
A fragment of Mozart's Sonata for
Two Pianos in D Major, K. 448, will be played,
which could have a positive effect on
epilepsy due to its rhythmic and melodic
structure that seems to synchronize with calmer
and more orderly brain patterns. Although its
benefits are not universal, it can be
used as a complementary therapy.
[music playing]
Now we will go into a little about what
therapeutic hypothermia is. It is a medical procedure
that reduces the patient's body temperature
to protect the brain from damage caused by
lack of oxygen. It is the last resort
in the absence of response to other therapies.
In this case, therapeutic hypothermia
was implemented with the use of a cooling
machine at 33 degrees Celsius.
Therapeutic hypothermia was effective
in controlling the patient's
seizures, causing seizures to cease
when they reached 34.3 degrees.
On the left we can see an image showing
a patient using this type of machine.
After treatment, for his recovery,
the patient was gradually rewarmed to
avoid complications. The patient was monitored
neurologically throughout to
assess possible sequelae.
He was eventually discharged from the hospital
and recovered satisfactorily.
As for subsequent follow-up, it is
worth mentioning the need for continued
antiepileptic treatment to prevent
seizure recurrence,
in addition to the importance of medical follow-up
to control epilepsy in the long term.
To conclude, therapeutic hypothermia was
successful in controlling seizures
in this case of super-refractory
status epilepticus. This may be
a valuable treatment option in cases of refractory status
epilepticus that do not respond to conventional therapies.
Its implementation requires a
multidisciplinary approach
involving neurology, intensive
care and other professionals to ensure
comprehensive patient management.
It is essential to assess the ethical risks
and benefits of the procedure and
ensure informed consent that
respects patient autonomy.
In addition, further research
is needed to determine its
long-term efficacy and safety.